# Conclusion

Data visualisations can facilitate comprehension of data by exploiting humans’ perceptual and cognitive capabilities. Systematically manipulating data visualisation designs in experimental studies can help reveal cognitive mechanisms involved in interpretation. This, in turn, can inform recommendations for effective design, leading to successful communication of data.

Data visualisations can illuminate many aspects of a dataset, from correlations to distributions. Viewers may also form impressions of values’ absolute magnitudes: how large or small values are. To understand this process, it is necessary to examine how graphical cues contribute to a viewer’s mental representation. Techniques from experimental psychology provide a means of investigating this aspect of cognitive processing. 

## Research Objectives

The aim of this thesis was to investigate how data visualisation design influences interpretations of the absolute magnitudes of values. This investigation focused on viewers’ *gist*-level representations of data, rather than their comprehension of specific values. I conducted a series of studies demonstrating that judgements about magnitude are informed by the relative positions of values within axis limits. These studies revealed that graphical cues to context play a role in the processing of how large or small values are.

## Main Findings

The three sets of experiments in this thesis consider the same overarching question. However, each provides a unique contribution.

The study in Chapter 3 manipulated axis limits in dot plots. This manipulation altered the position of plotted values, so that they appeared at high or low positions. The first experiment in this study established that interpretations of values’ magnitude were affected by axis limits. In the two subsequent experiments, I explored whether judgements were influenced by the relative positions of data points within axis limits, or the absolute physical positions of data points. An inverted axis orientation made it possible to distinguish between these potential explanations. Despite conventions around displaying magnitude, participants rated magnitudes as greater when values appeared closer to the bottom of the visualisation, which was associated with higher numerical values. This illustrates that the *relative* positions of data points within axis limits inform magnitude judgements.

The study in Chapter 4 manipulated the limits of colour legends accompanying choropleth maps. Rather than altering the appearance of plotted values, this manipulation only modified the range of numerical values and corresponding colours in colour legends. Participants interpreted magnitude as greater when the corresponding positions of the plotted values were located at a colour legend’s upper limit, rather than its halfway point. This illustrates that magnitude judgements are informed by the relationship between data points and axis values, not simply the appearance of plotted data points.

The study in Chapter 5 manipulated axis limits in bar charts. This manipulation compared upper axis limits based on ggplot2’s defaults to upper axis limits corresponding to denominator values in datasets. The first experiment established that participants interpreted magnitude as greater in the latter condition. In the subsequent experiment, I explored how awareness of numerical context affects the use of graphical cues to magnitude. When text containing dataset’s denominator value was removed, the degree to which axis limits informed magnitude judgements increased. This illustrates that knowledge about data points’ numerical context limits the influence of axis limits on interpretations.

The stimuli used in these studies reveal different approaches to conveying magnitude using axis limits. *Absolute frequencies* plotted in bar charts (Chapter 3) were associated with denominators, so upper axis limits were intrinsically linked to datasets. Conversely, *measurements* plotted in choropleth maps (Chapter 2) upper axis limits were not determined by denominator values. The *relative frequencies* plotted as percentages in dot plots (Chapter 1) could not be less than 0 or more than 100, so axis limits were subject to logical constraints. Therefore, designers must also consider the type of data at hand when identifying suitable axis limits for data visualisations. What constitutes *context* is not uniform.

Overall, this work provides consistent evidence of the influence of *framing effects* on magnitude judgements in data visualisations. Axes served as a frame of reference biasing the interpretation of numbers, thus mental representation of information was influenced by its presentation (Tversky and Kahneman, 1981; Kahneman, 1992). Furthermore, according to models of graph comprehension (Pinker, Carpenter and Shah), visual patterns are encoded prior to comprehension of numerical values and contextualisation of information. Therefore, first impressions elicited by a data visualisation may prejudice overall interpretations (Pandey et al. 2015; Yang et al. 2021). 

### Data Visualisation Literacy

In each study, I also investigated the role of participants’ data visualisation literacy levels in their interpretations of absolute magnitude. Data visualisation literacy levels did not account for variation in responses to axis manipulations. This accords with prior research on axis truncation, which found that the same subjective data visualisation literacy measure was not associated with the degree of bias in judgements of relative differences (Yang et al., 2021). A similar finding has also been observed using an objective data visualisation literacy measure (Okan et al., 2018).  Another experiment on the same issue, using yet another literacy measure, did observe that data visualisation literacy predicted bias (Driessen et al., 2022). However, a lack of diversity in the sample’s literacy levels diminished confidence in the utility of this measure. 

In this thesis, variability in participants’ responses was evident. This suggests that the data visualisation literacy measure employed was not best placed to capture these differences. This measure may register basic skills for comprehending visualisations, rather than susceptibility to visualisation design (Yang et al., 2021). Ge et al. (2023) suggest that critical thinking skills predict the degree of bias elicited by deceptive designs, and produced a data visualisation literacy measure designed to capture this capacity. However, its considerable length makes it unsuitable for use as a covariate in experimental studies. A shorter literacy measure of critical thinking in comprehension of data visualisations would be a valuable tool for future research. 

## Reproducibility

Historically, research on data visualisations has rarely been aligned with the principles of open and reproducible science (Haroz, 2018). ~*write a sentence on implications*~ The empirical work in this thesis was conducted with a focus on ensuring reproducibility. In addition to publicly sharing all data and code, I used containerisation software to capture the computational environment used for data processing, analysis and visualisation. This allows the manuscript for each chapter to be reproduced from the raw data, enhancing the transparency and sustainability of this work. ~*future research should follow suit and adopt open and reproducible working practices in order to advance/contribute in this field*~

## Contributions and Implications

This thesis addresses an important yet neglected topic in data visualisation research. Empirical results demonstrating viewers’ sensitivity to *absolute magnitude* present new considerations for data visualisation design. Experiments were designed to generate robust evidence (Kosara, 2016) to enhance the findings of prior work on this topic (Sandman et al., 1994). ~*strengths of my approach*~ Furthermore, my focus on identifying the underlying cognitive mechanisms provides insight into how graphical cues to absolute magnitude are processed and how additional factors influence interpretations.

This thesis challenges the notion of ‘objectively correct’ data visualisation design and presents a more nuanced perspective. Certainly, misrepresenting numerical values in data visualisations is an invalid practice. However, the axis manipulations explored in this thesis do not alter the numerical values presented, but the *subjective* judgements of these values. As Correll et al., (2020) argue, because these judgements depend on context, there is no *inherently truthful* axis setting which avoids influencing viewers. This thesis demonstrates that designers should be aware of what their visualisation implies about plotted data, and make design choices which faithfully represent the relevant characteristics of the plotted dataset.

The present work discusses *bias*, but use of this term does not necessarily warrant a negative perspective. Unquestioning acceptance of the message conveyed by a visualisation is obviously detrimental. However, *failing* to account for visual cues to the magnitude of values could also be considered a limitation in cognitive processing. Sensitivity to the relative positions of values within an axis range and the ability to weight this information in accordance with other knowledge constitutes a powerful capability. Appropriate use of graphical cues to magnitude provides designers with an opportunity to leverage this bias for effective communication.

Sensitivity to norms in communication is another relevant factor for interpreting the findings of this thesis. Gricean pragmatic principles (Grice, 1975), ~*suggest effective commiuncation is*. Under the assumption that visualisation design follows these principles, a chart’s implied message will guide viewers’ judgements. Values’ relative positions within axes would be considered relevant and reliable information, thus informing inferences about magnitude. 

## Limitations and Future Directions

This work does not suggest that conveying absolute magnitude will be appropriate in all scenarios. Other aspects of data may be considered more pertinent. Conflicting graphical cues may prevent designers conveying magnitude *in addition to* other aspects. For example, a truncated axis may clearly display relative differences between data points but omit context illustrating the absolute magnitudes of values. Alternatively, an extended axis may clearly display absolute magnitudes but obscure the relative differences between values. A possible compromise may involve generating two visualisations: one to illustrate absolute magnitudes and another to promote discrimination between values. A similar approach is discussed in work on axis truncation (Correll et al.), and has been reported to benefit users (Ritchie et al., 2019). Future work could investigate the utility of this approach for conveying both absolute magnitudes and relative differences. 

Eliciting judgements using rating scales is an established method for measuring interpretations of visualisations (see Correll et al. 2020, Witt, 2019, Yang et al. 2021, Pandey et al. 2015,  Stone et al. 2017, 2018, Okan et al. 2018, Okan et al. 2020, Sandman et al. 1994). The the measures used in this thesis sought to ensure that participants’ responses reflected message-level interpretations. Therefore, all scales captured ratings pertaining to the information presented, not simply the graphical elements. However, future work employing decision-making measures would complement this work. First, this would provide insight into how the use of axis limits in conveying magnitude influences behaviour. Second, this would more effectively illustrate the strength of effects observed. Measuring responses in terms of well-defined units (e.g., monetary value) can capture the magnitude of bias in a more concrete manner. Other experiments in the field offer inspiration for effective and comprehensible decision-making tasks (e.g., Kale et al. 2020, Bancilhon et al., 2019). 

~*rewrite*~ Future work could also investigate the contribution of numerical context when plotting information about familiar measurements and relative frequencies. One approach to investigating this question would involve testing multiple different axis ranges whilst maintaining the approximate physical positions of data points. This would reveal whether interpretations of magnitude are directly proportional to the range of numerical values on an axis. Furthermore, this thesis focuses on how axis limits inform magnitude judgements, but many other factors may also influence interpretations, from numerical units to prior beliefs. A comprehensive account of the cognitive processing of magnitude in data visualisations will also need to address additional biases and cognitive mechanisms. 

An algebraic approach to visualisation design suggests that material changes in data should be reflected accordingly in a visualisation (Kindlmann and Scheidegger, 2014). However, this capacity requires the ability to convey material changes in the *specific aspect* of a dataset of interest. For example, a design supporting comprehension of relative differences may be poorly suited to conveying other messages. This thesis demonstrates that conventional data visualisation formats present an opportunity for communicating an often-overlooked aspect of a dataset: absolute magnitude. Just as adjusting axis limits influences interpretations about absolute magnitude, other design choices may help convey other messages. Graphical cues to other under-explored features of data, such as noise or numerosity, would benefit from future investigation. Developing an understanding of cognitive processes involved in interpreting these features would inform effective design. 

## Closing Remarks

Context makes numbers meaningful. In data visualisations, context can be established not only by plotted data, but also extrinsic details. By determining the physical characteristics of a visualisation, designers may also influence the message conveyed about the data. Viewers’ sensitivity to the framing of data illustrates the power of design choices to mislead or enlighten. 


## New

The final paragraph of the work that first explored magnitude judgements, touches on many of the relevant issues, such as subjectivity and design intentions.

Sandman et al., (1994)
*“To construct a risk ladder intentionally is to make judgments about the risk perceptions that are likely to be encountered and the risk perceptions that are appropriate to encourage… If such decisions strike the reader as manipulative, the solution may be to use several risk ladders, or to acknowledgein text the bias and intention of the ladder selected. Certainly, it is no solution to renounce the intention and keep the bias.”*

One of the contributions of this study is that by examining how people make interpretations, I highlight alternative approaches to designing visualisations, suggesting that conventions are not always right. 

Decision-making tasks would also help get a more rounded view of magnitude - not just based on numerical information but also other notions of magnitude.  

Zacks and Tversky - affordances in assessing magnitude if there is some numerical context. 

Sandman et al., 1994) had set the stage, this expands the investigation to explore new areas in this topic. Compared to before, the evidence base is not only stronger, but also broader, and more in depth.

future study para 3 - numerical or graphical cues?

Neither plausible values nor absolute values provide a complete picture.