---
bibliography: axis-extension.bib
---

## General Discussion

Axis limits can be easily manipulated in common data visualisation software, in order to include a visual cue to denominator information. However, these defaults are based on plotted data only, so often omit denominator information. We demonstrate that plotted values' magnitudes were interpreted as smaller for bar charts with axes that extended to the denominator value, rather than those employing default axis settings. The influence of axis limits was particularly large when no denominator information was included in the text accompanying a chart. This provides insight into the cognitive process involved in magnitude judgements, indicating that denominator information is an important aspect in interpreting plotted values in bar charts.

In Experiment 1, we identified a framing effect, wherein charts with axes that accommodated a denominator value elicited smaller magnitude judgements compared to charts with default axes. In both conditions, the denominator was explicitly presented in the text. Additionally, some extreme responses in the default condition appeared to represent a disregard for denominator information. Given the apparent importance of this information, we conducted another experiment in order to examine the denominator's role in the cognitive processing of magnitude. We examined how interpretations were affected by the absence of denominator information, thus capturing how this information was incorporated differently across chart designs.

Experiment 2 makes several additional contributions. First, it replicated the main effect from Experiment 1. That is, we observed a propensity to interpret magnitudes as smaller when values were shown with an extended axis, rather than a default axis. Second, it illustrates the impact of including the denominator in accompanying text. This cue affects viewers' interpretations differently depending on whether a chart's axis also incorporates the same value. Without denominator information in text, the magnitude of values plotted using default axes can be ambiguous. Accordingly, drastically higher ratings in the absence of denominator information illustrate the denominator's role in reducing ambiguity. Interpretation of values plotted using extended axes was affected to a lesser extent by the denominator's absence. Thus, the impact of a bar chart's axis is greater when not accompanied by a denominator. This suggests axis limits facilitate recognition of denominator information when interpreting magnitudes.

Third, Experiment 2 replicated the pattern of responses observed in Experiment 1 for charts with default axes and accompanying denominator information. This pattern consists of a small number of higher magnitude ratings, in contrast to the general tendency for lower magnitude ratings. @fig-e2-mag reveals a close resemblance between the distribution of these higher ratings and the overall distribution of ratings for default charts *without* accompanying denominator information. This suggests that these extreme ratings may share a cause. Unusually high responses in the presence of denominator information likely result from failure to account for the denominator and a subsequent reliance on the chart's appearance. The analogous responses to charts without accompanying denominators (Experiment 2) can be considered an experimentally-induced instance of the same effect.

Fourth, additional ratings collected in Experiment 2 provide insight into participants' confidence. Although analysis of these ratings indicated a main effect of axis limits and an interaction between denominator information and axis limits, the minuscule effect sizes cast doubt over the practical significance of these effects. In spite of this, absence of a denominator clearly lowered confidence. This suggests that participants were hesitant to form magnitude judgements based solely on a bar chart's appearance. Inclusion of a denominator value in text was preferred regardless of graphical cues to context.

### Relationship to Prior Work

Our focus on judgements of values’ magnitudes is noteworthy because the vast majority of related work has explored participants’ judgements of *differences between* values [@okan_individual_2012; @okan_probability_2020; @okan_designing_2018; @stone_foregroundbackground_2003; @stone_salience_2018; @garcia-retamero_who_2010; @yang_truncating_2021; @witt_graph_2019; @correll_truncating_2020]. Responses to questions about values’ magnitudes have often been obscured through inclusion in composite measures [e.g., @okan_designing_2018], or have been collected to assess comprehension, rather than interpretation [e.g., @garcia-retamero_who_2010]. As @stone_effects_2015 discuss, failing to consider interpretations of values’ magnitudes reflects two issues. First, neglecting values’ magnitudes overlooks a relevant aspect of numerical information. Second, neglecting participants’ *interpretations* limits insight into decision-making, which is not simply governed by accurate retrieval of information [see @reyna_theory_2008].

Whereas much prior research has been limited to interpretation of risk information [@garcia-retamero_who_2010; @okan_individual_2012; @okan_probability_2020; @okan_designing_2018; @stone_foregroundbackground_2003; @stone_salience_2018; @stone_designing_2017; @stone_effects_2015], we demonstrate that biases in interpretation extend to a wide range of non-risk scenarios. This provides confidence that these findings are widely applicable, and using *multiple* trials per participant enhances statistical power. When generating charts that do not include denominator values, previous experiments [@garcia-retamero_who_2010; @okan_designing_2018] appear to have employed arbitrary axis limits. By employing axis limits based on {ggplot2}’s default settings, our materials reflect a common practice, enhancing our experiment’s ecological validity.

We contribute to a large body of evidence illustrating biases in the interpretation of numerical information, specifically *framing effects* [@tversky_framing_1981]. Our results are consistent with research demonstrating that manipulating bar charts’ axis limits influences interpretation of plotted values [@garcia-retamero_who_2010; @okan_designing_2018]. Furthermore, @okan_designing_2018 found that participants' perceptions of risk were influenced more by bar charts' axis limits when labels containing numerators and denominators were excluded. Similarly, we observed that interpretations of magnitude were influenced more by bar charts' axis limits when denominator values were omitted from accompanying text.

A previous study exploring interpretation of magnitude in bar charts observed different responses according to whether stacked bars or blank space conveyed alternative outcomes [@stone_designing_2017]. We demonstrate that manipulating the amount of blank space above bars can elicit different magnitude judgements, without plotting alternative outcomes explicitly. Earlier work investigating (in)consistency in the formats used to display numerators and denominators is also relevant. @stone_effects_2015 found that displaying a value using icons, accompanied by a denominator in text, increased impressions of that value's magnitude, compared to when both the value and denominator were presented in text. We too found higher ratings when values displayed using bars were only accompanied by a denominator in text, compared to when a corresponding graphical cue to the denominator value was also present.

According to Fuzzy Trace Theory, different interpretations can arise due to different gist-level representations, despite accurate comprehension of presented values [@reyna_theory_2008]. Therefore, access to denominator information in accompanying text did not prevent our chart designs influencing judgements. Encoding of gist is reported to be influenced by the appearance of graphical elements [@reyna_theory_2008]. This suggests that the taller bars in our default axis conditions were responsible for impressions of greater magnitude, compared to shorter bars in our extended axis conditions. That charts with extended axes elicited lower magnitude ratings is also consistent with Stone et al.’s [-@stone_salience_2018] proportional reasoning account, which suggests that part-to-whole displays facilitate processing of a larger numerical context.

We did not find evidence that data visualisation literacy affected our results. This is contrary to the finding that data visualisation literacy predicted the efficacy of using icon arrays to reduce denominator neglect [@okan_individual_2012]. However, this is consistent with the finding that the impact of manipulations like ours (axis range, numerical labels) are independent of data visualisation literacy [@okan_designing_2018]. This measure may capture whether people have sufficient ability to extract information from a visualisation, rather than predicting the degree to which they will be influenced by subtler design choices [@yang_truncating_2021]. Numeracy is associated with decreased sensitivity to framing effects [@peters_numeracy_2006], so this may be a better candidate for understanding individual differences in response to visualisation design.

### Implications

When conveying values' magnitudes, both axis limits and accompanying text warrant consideration from data visualisation designers. A bar chart produced using default settings is not equivalent to a bar chart with an axis that incorporates a denominator value. Extending an axis in this manner increases consistency in judgements and may provide insurance against individuals who fail to account for accompanying denominator information. Similarly, where constraints prevent inclusion of a denominator value in text, an extended axis should facilitate viewers' recognition of this numerical context. We observed that confidence ratings were consistently high in the absence of a denominator in text, despite use of an extended axis. Explicitly providing denominator values in text, regardless of graphical cues, would therefore promote viewers’ confidence in their judgements.

It is also worth considering situations which may accentuate the observed bias. High cognitive load exacerbates the numerosity bias [@pelham_easy_1994], therefore may also interfere with magnitude judgements. Even when denominator information is supplied in text, high cognitive load could prevent this information from informing interpretations. This would likely increase reliance on bar charts' appearances, like in Experiment 2. Additionally, assuming that an audience has knowledge of a dataset's denominator may increase biases in individuals who are unfamiliar with the topic.

### Limitations and Future Work

This work is concerned with visualisations intended to convey plotted values' magnitudes. However, design considerations will differ when conveying *differences* between values. In this case, axis ranges should be determined by the magnitude of the differences [@correll_truncating_2020; @witt_graph_2019; @yang_truncating_2021]. Consequently, our recommendations are not relevant for all communicative scenarios. However, maintaining awareness of the implication of plotted values' magnitudes may help avoid misinterpretation of data, even if this type of judgement is not a primary concern.

Our experiments apply best to controlled scenarios, such as surveys and experiments where all plotted values share the same denominator. These findings may also extend to datasets with unequal denominators, if bars are used to depict proportions or percentages, permitting use of a single meaningful axis limit. However, this design will not be suitable for plotting other types of dataset. We also acknowledge that proportions are not the only factor influencing magnitude judgements: subject matter is also likely to inform assessments. For example, bars clearly depicting one or two hours spent on administrative tasks within a 35-hour work week will still elicit some differences of opinion regarding whether these values are high or low.

All materials were produced using {ggplot2}. Therefore, our conclusions about default axis limits only pertain to bar charts created using this package's settings, though we expect other visualisation libraries' default settings to elicit similar responses, due to similarity in their behaviour. For uniformity in our materials, we only employed default charts where the highest gridline was positioned below the highest value, since this was the most common visual arrangement. We did not examine the minority of cases where the highest gridline exceeds the highest value. Whether this influences magnitude judgements could be explored in future experiments. In addition, future work should employ decision-making tasks to quantify the impact of axis limits on applied judgements.

### Conclusion

In two experiments, we generated evidence on the effects of default and extended axis limits, illustrating the influential role of denominators in gauging magnitude. We provide insight into the cognitive processes involved in interpreting plotted values' magnitudes in bar charts and offer recommendations for facilitating judgements. Framing effects demonstrate the power of presentation choices on the interpretation of numbers.
