---
bibliography: axis-extension.bib
---

## Introduction

The question 'Is it a big number?' is often raised on the BBC radio programme *More or Less* when probing eye-catching statistics. A figure of several million pounds may initially seem large, but may represent a small proportion of total government spending. Awareness of a denominator value can influence judgement of a number's magnitude. In data visualisation, this contextual information can be displayed by extending an axis to accommodate the denominator value. However, this approach is infrequently used, since typical default axis settings are based on plotted data only. In this study, we investigate how these axis limits affect interpretations of how large or small plotted values are.

### Overview

Across two experiments, we investigate the interpretation of magnitudes in bar charts. We plotted fictitious datasets which contained multiple observations, all with the same denominator values. In the first experiment, we displayed charts with default axes which terminated just above plotted values, or axes which extended to the denominator value specified in accompanying text. Participants rated values' magnitudes as higher when default axes were used, compared to extended axes. In the second experiment, we manipulated the axis limits, as before, and also the presence of the denominator information in accompanying text. 
Variation in responses to the two difference axis settings was starker when denominator information was not supplied. This indicates that this information influences the biasing effect of a chart’s appearance.

### Related Work

A wealth of research demonstrates biases in the interpretation of numbers. A survival rate elicits different judgements of a disease compared to its corresponding mortality rate [@tversky_framing_1981], the fat content of a meat product elicits different judgements of the product compared to its corresponding lean content [@levin_associative_1987]. The units used to express the same values (e.g., months vs. years) affect comparisons [@burson_six_2009; @monga_years_2012] and also interpretations of precision and accuracy [@zhang_how_2012].

Various biases in magnitude judgements reveal the importance of accounting for numerical context. Base rate neglect describes difficulty acknowledging population-level characteristics when making judgements about a sample [@cosmides_are_1996]. Format neglect describes a bias against incorporating set size information when judging percentage formats (top 20%) and numerical formats (top 10, [@sevilla_format_2018]). Denominator neglect occurs in judgements which overweight numerator information at the expense of denominator information [@reyna_numeracy_2008]. The latter also leads (in part) to large percentages of a small number appearing greater than the *numerically equivalent* smaller percentages of a larger number [@li_big_2013]. The general mechanism responsible for these biases is a failure to properly acknowledge numerical context.

Visualisations can help combat biases. Denominator information becomes visually available when icon arrays present both focal outcomes (e.g., number deceased) *and also* alternative outcomes (e.g., number survived). Research suggests that the combined array acts as a visual cue to the denominator (e.g., total number at risk), facilitating reasoning. For example, including alternative outcomes in an icon array, and therefore displaying denominator information, reduces denominator neglect, increasing comprehension of relative risk [@garcia-retamero_who_2010]. Icon arrays displaying both types of outcome are particularly helpful for understanding datasets with unequal denominators, and for individuals with high graph literacy [@okan_individual_2012]. However, these effects are largest when depicting small probabilities [@okan_probability_2020].

Stacked bar charts function similarly to icon arrays: lower bars represent the focal outcome, upper bar represent the alternative outcome, and their combination represents the denominator. Like icon arrays, stacked bar charts lessen the influence of denominator neglect [@stone_foregroundbackground_2003]. However, denominator information can be displayed in bar charts without using additional stacked bars representing alternative outcomes. Extending an axis to incorporate the denominator value also communicates relevant numerical context. In this case, the blank space between the bars for focal outcomes and the upper axis limit corresponds to the alternative outcomes. Research has demonstrated that bar charts representing alternative outcomes using blank space increase perceptions of risk likelihood compared to those representing alternative outcomes using stacked bars [@stone_designing_2017]. This research did not examine how presenting *denominator information* influences interpretation, since identical axis limits were employed across conditions.

Directly manipulating bar charts' upper axis limits provides insight into use of this source of denominator information. Bar charts with axes which extended to the denominator value produce more accurate estimates of changes in risk [@garcia-retamero_who_2010]. This design also elicits decreased ratings of risk perception [@okan_designing_2018], though numerical labels reduce this effect. In both studies, accompanying text included the denominator value. These studies demonstrate that extending axes to incorporate denominator values influences interpretation of risk. However, they do not provide specific evidence on how interpretations of *plotted values' magnitudes* are affected. @garcia-retamero_who_2010 measured risk understanding: how faithfully participants represented the exact numbers displayed. Only assessing comprehension fails to capture individuals' *impressions* of plotted information [@feldman-stewart_further_2007]. Understanding the 'gist' obtained from a visualisation is crucial since this takes precedence over 'verbatim' information when making decisions [@reyna_theory_2008]. @reyna_theory_2008 argues that assessing gist requires consideration of how plotted values' magnitudes are interpreted, since plotted values' relative differences are only one aspect of a dataset conveyed by a visualisation. Indeed, @okan_designing_2018 collected magnitude ratings, yet these cannot be examined in isolation, since they were assimilated into a combined measure of perceived risk, along with ratings of the degree of *difference between* plotted values. Outside the risk communication literature, a substantial body of research has demonstrated that judgements of the difference between values change as a function of axis range [@pandey_how_2015; @witt_graph_2019; @correll_truncating_2020; @yang_truncating_2021]. In spite of this, research has neglected the effects of axis range on judgements of the magnitude of *the values themselves*. This is the focus of experiments presented in this work.

Various accounts have sought to explain the consequences of including denominator information in visualisations. Depicting denominators may facilitate understanding of part-to-whole relationships, diminishing class-inclusion errors associated with denominator neglect [@reyna_theory_2008]. This argument is consistent with Fuzzy Trace Theory, which also predicts the influence of physical attributes in gist representations, such that the appearance of short bars in charts with extended axes may contribute to smaller magnitude judgements [@reyna_theory_2008]. Additionally, [@stone_salience_2018] suggest facilitation of proportional reasoning may be largely responsible for observed effects. Increasing the salience of the denominator in text fails to affect judgements, yet a graphical representation effectively communicates the true scale of the denominator, helping put numerators into perspective.

Prior work on extending axes, discussed above, did not disclose methods for determining axis limits in charts without denominators. The values used as upper limits appear to be arbitrary. In the present study, we increase ecological validity by employing default axis limits from {ggplot2} [@wickham_ggplot2_2016], a popular visualisation tool used in the R programming environment. Furthermore, previous studies' statistical power and generalisability have been limited by the use of one [@okan_designing_2018] or two [@garcia-retamero_who_2010] trials per participant. Our experiments explore a range of scenarios (32 experimental trials per participant). The data presented are also unrelated to risk judgements, the domain of this prior work.

### Open Research Statement

Data, analysis code, and pre-registrations are available at osf.io/854uc/.
