# Postscript to Chapter 4 {.unnumbered}

## Overview

The first set of experiments in this thesis was designed to examine whether axis range influences interpretations of absolute magnitude in data visualisations. Axis range was initially identified as a plausible factor influencing magnitude judgements because it dictates the physical positions of data points, which have conventional associations with magnitude (e.g., higher positions are associated with higher values). However, this set of experiments revealed that the principal way axis limits influence interpretations is by dictating the *relative positions* of data points. Thus, an axis provides a frame of reference which informs subjective judgements of magnitude.

## Rationale for Experimental Design

Investigating the influence of axis range on magnitude judgements required appropriately designed experimental stimuli. It was important to employ a suitable visualisation format for the axis manipulations in this set of experiments. Dot plots, which were used throughout, employ a position-only encoding. This means that, unlike in bar charts, the encoding is not distorted by axes that do not start at zero. This afforded greater freedom when generating datasets and choosing axis limits. The visualisations could present a wide range of values and also maintain the same difference between the upper and lower limits. Furthermore, unlike bar charts, the physical characteristics of the data points themselves did not change due to the manipulation or inversion of axes, preventing unwanted confounds. The minimalistic design contributes to tight experimental control.

In seeking to understand how axis ranges influence cognitive processing of absolute magnitude, this set of experiments adopted some necessarily contrived design choices. In particular, the use of singular probability point estimates does not conform to the recommendations for visualising probabilistic information, which involve explicitly encoding uncertainty and displaying discrete outcomes (Fernandes et al., 2018; Kay et al., 2016). In addition, the use of inverted axes violates conventions and is associated with difficulties in comprehension (Pandey et al., 2015; Woodin et al., 2022). However, there is no evidence to suggest that these design choices significantly hindered comprehension in this set of experiments. Indeed, participants’ responses to inverted axes were consistent with the understanding that higher values were presented at lower physical positions. This behaviour would not be expected if these visualisations resulted in fundamental misunderstandings. As required for systematic experimental study, stimuli were developed in order to facilitate investigation of underlying cognitive mechanisms.

This set of experiments also required careful consideration of participants’ task. Participants were asked to consider various risks, with the chance of negative outcomes presented as percentage probabilities. This topic was chosen to emulate the type of data displayed in everyday settings where absolute magnitude would be a relevant concern. The task was not designed to assess the comprehension of specific numerical values. Instead, the task was designed to interrogate *message*-level interpretations, pertaining to the prevailing impressions resulting from the visualisations. Thus, participants were instructed to consider *overall* magnitude (and severity of consequences), and respond with a subjective judgement, rather than a precise numerical estimate. Collecting these measures is important, because the *gist* of information, rather than *verbatim* knowledge, typically informs behaviour (Reyna, 2008).

## Summary of Findings

This work demonstrated that axis limits contribute to interpretations of absolute magnitude in data visualisations. When different axis limits accompanied the same data points, magnitude judgements were affected in a subtle yet systematic manner. Participants generated inferences about magnitude by using axis limits as reference points. Despite an inconclusive 2x2 experiment, a high-powered experiment involving inverted charts revealed that magnitude ratings were higher when data points were numerically high within the range of axis values. Severity ratings were not consistently affected by axis limits. It is also important to recognise that interpretations of magnitude were not *dictated* by the numerical context provided by axes. That is, magnitude ratings were influenced by the absolute values plotted, not just their relative positions.

Prior research on axis limits has largely focused on interpretation of *relative magnitude*: the magnitude of *difference between plotted values* (Correll et al., 2020; Driessen et al., 2022; Pandey et al., 2015; Stone et al., 2003; Witt, 2019; Yang et al., 2021). However, the first set of experiments in this thesis provides evidence that axis limits also affect interpretations of *absolute magnitude*: the magnitude of *the values themselves*. Consequently, it highlights an additional consideration for designers when choosing axis limits. These results accord with prior findings on this topic, which found that the upper and lower limits in risk ladder visualisations affected impressions of risk (Sandman et al., 1994). The first set of experiments in this thesis used a range of scenarios, specific measures, and highly-controlled stimuli, thus building upon Sandman et al’s (1994) study to construct a robust evidence base.

## References

Correll M, Bertini E, Franconeri S. 2020. Truncating the Y-Axis: Threat or Menace? Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. Honolulu HI USA: ACM. pp. 1–12. doi:[10.1145/3313831.3376222](https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376222)

Driessen JEP, Vos DAC, Smeets I, Albers CJ. 2022. Misleading graphs in context: Less misleading than expected. *PLOS ONE* **17**:e0265823. doi:[10.1371/journal.pone.0265823](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0265823)

Fernandes M, Walls L, Munson S, Hullman J, Kay M. 2018. Uncertainty Displays Using Quantile Dotplots or CDFs Improve Transit Decision-MakingProceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. Montreal QC Canada: ACM. pp. 1–12. doi:[10.1145/3173574.3173718](https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173718)

Kay M, Kola T, Hullman JR, Munson SA. 2016. When (ish) is My Bus?: User-centered Vi- sualizations of Uncertainty in Everyday, Mobile Predictive SystemsProceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. San Jose California USA: ACM. pp. 5092–5103. doi:[10.1145/2858036.2858558](https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858558)

Pandey AV, Rall K, Satterthwaite ML, Nov O, Bertini E. 2015. How Deceptive are Deceptive Visualizations?: An Empirical Analysis of Common Distortion Technique- sProceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’15. Seoul, Republic of Korea: ACM Press. pp. 1469–1478. doi:[10.1145/2702123.2702608](https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702608)

Reyna VF. 2008. A Theory of Medical Decision Making and Health: Fuzzy Trace Theory. *Medical Decision Making* **28**:850–865. doi:[10.1177/0272989X08327066](https://doi.org/10.1177/0272989X08327066)

Sandman PM, Weinstein ND, Miller P. 1994. High Risk or Low: How Location on a ”Risk Ladder” Affects Perceived Risk. *Risk Analysis* **14**:35–45. doi:[10.1111/j.1539-6924.1994.tb00026.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1539-6924.1994.tb00026.x)

Stone ER, Sieck WR, Bull BE, Frank Yates J, Parks SC, Rush CJ. 2003. Foreground:background salience: Explaining the effects of graphical displays on risk avoidance. *Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes* **90**:19–36. doi:[10.1016/S0749-5978(03)00003-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0749-5978(03)00003-7)

Witt JK. 2019. Graph Construction: An Empirical Investigation on Setting the Range of the Y-Axis. *Meta-Psychology* **2**:1–20. doi:[10.15626/MP.2018.895](https://doi.org/10.15626/MP.2018.895)

Woodin G, Winter B, Padilla L. 2022. Conceptual Metaphor and Graphical Convention Influence the Interpretation of Line Graphs. *IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics* **28**:1209–1221. doi:[10.1109/TVCG.2021.3088343](https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2021.3088343)

Yang BW, Vargas Restrepo C, Stanley ML, Marsh EJ. 2021. Truncating Bar Graphs Persistently Misleads Viewers. *Journal of Applied Research in Memory and Cognition* S2211368120300978. doi:[10.1016/j.jarmac.2020.10.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jarmac.2020.10.002)