# Introduction

Data visualisations help people make sense of numbers. Whilst a list of numbers may allude to an upwards trend, presenting those numbers *as* visual phenomena can aid interpretation. A data visualisation can systematically depict the precise numerical values, facilitating mental processing of this information. 

As *external* representations of data, visualisations reduce perceptual and cognitive burdens in interpretation [@scaife_external_1996]. By imparting efficiency and clarity, data visualisations support pattern-recognition and reasoning. However, a single dataset can be depicted in numerous ways, and different designs can vary widely in their effectiveness [@franconeri_science_2021]. Thus, data visualisation’s strength can also be its vulnerability. Outsourcing cognitive processes to a graphical depiction leaves a viewer at the mercy of the chosen method of visual representation. Thus, understanding successful design is crucial.

The effectiveness of data visualisations can be defined in many ways, encompassing their various objectives, which include informing, persuading, engaging, and promoting retention of information [@bertini_why_2020]. However, in general, successful data visualisations will convey pertinent information in a visually- and cognitively-comprehensible manner [@mackinlay_automating_1986; @van_wijk_value_2005]. Failing to meet these criteria risks misleading viewers, which is antithetical to the purpose of data visualisation. Therefore, knowledge of human factors in visualisation is vital for ensuring charts, graphs, and maps achieve their potential.

## Research Motivation and Objective

Interpreting data in any medium does not involve simply observing numerical values, but rather identifying patterns and making *inferences* about the data. For example, one may notice that values are decreasing rapidly, or that there is substantial variability in the dataset, or that some data are missing. One may also make inferences about how large or small values are. This is an important aspect of understanding data, because the same numerical value can be considered large or small depending on its context.

The BBC radio programme *More or Less*, which examines statistics reported in the news and elsewhere, often addresses this issue. Some figures may instinctively seem large, others small. However, asking the question ‘Is it a big number?’ considers whether this initial impression is appropriate. For example, a country’s multi-trillion dollar national debt may appear high, but its level of debt may be similar to that of other countries when accounting for its high GDP [@mcdonald_us_2023]. Similarly, understanding the context of the Richter scale is required to determine that a value less than one does indeed reflect a small earthquake magnitude [@harford_mini-budget_2022]. Gauging magnitude is important for interpreting numbers in a wide variety of situations.

Because data visualisations are used to convey numerical information, it is important to understand how they may influence **subjective** judgements **about** the magnitude of presented values. Studying the cognitive processing of magnitude can reveal how inferences are generated and provide insight into the effects of data visualisation design choices. This, in turn, can inform recommendations for designers who may wish to represent the magnitude of values using graphical cues. Yet, this has been an under-explored topic, with insufficient empirical research exploring this aspect of interpreting visualisations. The objective of this thesis is to generate robust empirical evidence on the interpretation of **absolute** magnitude in data visualisations. **References to *absolute* magnitude in this thesis do not pertain to *objective* assessments, since this research focuses on *subjective* judgements. Instead, *absolute* magnitude refers to the magnitude of *numbers themselves*, rather than the magnitude of differences between numbers (*relative magnitude*).**

## Contributions

Through a series of empirical experiments, I demonstrate that data visualisation design choices can affect mental representation of numbers’ magnitudes. These large-sample, controlled experiments strengthen and expand the existing evidence base on this overlooked aspect of data visualisation. I reveal that, in various types of visualisations, graphical cues to context play a role in the processing of how large or small values are. Specifically, judgements about magnitude are informed by the relative positions of values within axis limits. Focusing on underlying cognitive mechanisms generates findings which are applicable to a variety of visualisation formats. These findings also contribute recommendations for designers, which involve considering suitable axis ranges in order to convey magnitude appropriately. This guidance challenges a convention in data visualisation design and advocates against the use of particular default settings, where appropriate. 

## Overview of the Thesis

In Chapter 2, I provide context for the empirical work conducted in this project, by reviewing related research. I advocate for an evidence-based approach to data visualisation design which takes into account the mental processing of information. I discuss perceptual and cognitive biases in the interpretation of visualisations, and with a particular focus on the role of numerical axes. This chapter justifies the focus of my investigation and explains how it is informed by prior work in this area.

In Chapter 3, I discuss the methodology and epistemological approach employed in this thesis. In addition to explaining my chosen experimental and statistical techniques, I describe how research projects can benefit from efforts to increase transparency. Approaches for increasing the reproducibility of research are presented, in line with recommendations from a variety of disciplines. A particular emphasis is placed on computational reproducibility: the capacity to recreate the computational environment used in generating results. This provides background for the practices used in the following empirical research chapters.

In Chapter 4, I present a set of three experiments which establish that interpretations of magnitude can be influenced by data visualisation designs. The first experiment demonstrates that manipulating axis limits in dot plots affects participants’ judgements of overall magnitude. Two further experiments investigate whether this occurs because axis limits alter the absolute or relative positions of plotted values within axis limits. In dot plots with inverted y-axes, where higher numerical values are presented at lower positions, values near bottom were associated with higher magnitudes. This illustrates that interpretations of magnitude are informed by the relative positions of values within axis limits.

In Chapter 5, I present an experiment which explores how visualisations may influence interpretations of magnitude even when the appearance of plotted values remains unchanged. This experiment demonstrates that manipulating colour legend limits in choropleth maps affects participants’ judgements of overall magnitude. Participants rated magnitudes as lower when the range of values on the colour legend extended beyond the largest plotted value. This illustrates that the numerical context accompanying plotted values can influence interpretations of magnitude, without altering the physical appearance of those values.

In Chapter 6, I present a set of two experiments which investigate the role of contextual information on interpretations of magnitude. The first experiment demonstrates that participants’ judgements of overall magnitude were affected by extension of bar charts’ upper axis limits which incorporated a denominator value. A second experiment reveals that participants’ bias was increased when this denominator information was excluded from the text accompanying the chart. This illustrates that knowledge about a dataset’s characteristics (e.g., denominator value) can influence the extent to which design choices affect interpretations of magnitude.

Finally, in Chapter 7, I present a synthesis of this empirical work, alongside a discussion of implications and future directions.
