# Postscript to Chapter 7

## Overview

The final study in this thesis was designed to examine the role of denominator information in the interpretation of absolute magnitude in data visualisations. A data visualisation’s axis may be expanded to incorporate not just plausible values, but a *denominator* from the underlying dataset. When this graphical cue is accompanied by a textual cue to denominator information, its influence on interpretations of magnitude is diminished, compared to when no textual cue is present. Thus, this study revealed that accompanying contextual information, not just visualisation design, informs subjective judgements of magnitude.

## Rationale for Experimental Design

Manipulating upper axis limits in bar charts necessarily alters the length of the bars. As demonstrated in the first study in this thesis, manipulating axes in dot plots alters the physical characteristics of values to a lesser extent. However, changes the length of bars should not necessarily be considered a confound. This study aimed to explore the effect of incorporating denominators in axes on magnitude judgements. Such modifications cannot avoid also changing the length of bars themselves, therefore the resulting *overall* appearance of the visualisation should be considered part of the manipulation. A lack of precise experimental control over separate elements does not prevent valuable insight into the cognitive processing of magnitude in bar charts.

This study employed default axis limits from a popular visualisation tool in half of experimental trials. As default settings are frequently adopted by data visualisation designers, this reduces artificiality in stimuli, enhancing the experiment’s ecological validity. In addition, this means the study’s conclusions are directly applicable to common visualisation designs, assisting the development of relevant considerations for designers.

## Summary of Findings

In the first experiment in this study, participants rated magnitudes as lower when axes terminated well above plotted data, compared to just above plotted data. The former condition provided a graphical cue to the relevant denominator value, whereas the latter condition, which used the default axis setting, did not. When there was no graphical cue to the denominator, a proportion of extreme high ratings reflected substantial differences in the interpretation of charts in the two conditions. The second experiment revealed that substantial differences in interpretation regularly occur when accompanying text omits denominator information, eliciting a greater bias than when denominator information is included. This interaction demonstrates that awareness of the numerical context of plotted values diminishes the influence of axis limits on interpretations of magnitude.

Risk perception research on axes and denominators in bar charts observed that including labels with numerical values decreased the impact of graphical depictions (Okan et al., 2018). This final study corroborates this claim by manipulating numerical values in accompanying text. This study also expands upon prior work by exploring responses to a different topic (not risk-related), and examining absolute magnitude judgements, which have previously been neglected. For example, measuring risk understanding (Garcia-Retamero and Galesic, 2010), or combining absolute magnitude ratings with other judgements to create a general risk perception measure (Okan et al., 2018), which has prevented examination of absolute magnitude judgements in isolation.

## Relationship to Study 1 and Study 2

This study concludes the empirical investigations in this thesis by revealing how axis limits and additional cues interact to influence magnitude judgements. This demonstrates that considering contextual information is important for understanding the effects of design choices on interpretations of magnitude. However, it also provides insight into the differences in the two preceding studies regarding the *extent* to which axis limits influenced magnitude judgements. The first study observed relatively small differences in participants’ ratings between conditions, whereas the second study observed much larger differences. In light on this final study’s findings, it seems likely that the lack of contextual information in the latter may have contributed to this contrasts. Using fictitious standardised units may have increased reliance on axis limits as a source of information when assessing magnitude.

This study used denominator values as upper axis limits. This contrasts with preceding studies, where the type of data plotted did not have a corresponding denominator (i.e., relative frequencies, measurements). Therefore, the final study extends the line of enquiry to examine a different approach to setting axis limits, based on the underlying dataset. By incorporating a denominator, an axis presents the entire range of possible values, rather than a range of plausible values. Viewers’ inferences about magnitude may different in these two cases. Denominators may increase awareness of whether plotted values are *numerically* high or low, whereas plausible values may increase awareness of whether plotted values are *comparatively* high or low, in the context of other relevant magnitudes. Alternatively, viewers may not be sensitive to this difference. This would be an interesting topic for future work, providing greater insight into the framing effects elicited by axis limits.

Both this study on bar charts and Study 2 on choropleth maps explore approaches to designing data visualisations beyond typical defaults. They suggest that not all data visualisation designs are suitable for communicating all aspects of data. Therefore, considering alternatives to the default options may be useful when conveying absolute magnitude. Atypical approaches to data visualisation design may provide clarity for viewers.
