# Postscript to Chapter 5

## Overview

The second study in this thesis was designed to examine whether colour legends influence interpretations of absolute magnitude in choropleth maps. Colour legends convey the mapping between numerical values and colours, and can be extended beyond the range of the dataset to incorporate other relevant values. This study revealed that magnitude was interpreted as greater when plotted data points were numerically high within the range of values on the colour legend. Thus, a colour legend provides a frame of reference which informs subjective judgements of magnitude.

## Rationale for Experimental Design

Unlike the previous study, generating stimuli for this study involved identifying topics which could plausibly be associated with geographic regions. The type of data presented was also a relevant consideration in order to broaden the scope of my investigation. The previous study on dot plots presented relative frequencies, and displaying absolute frequencies is not appropriate in choropleth maps (Dent, 2008). Therefore, to manage these constraints, reduce complexity, and expand inquiry to a different type of data, all choropleth maps in this study displayed pollution measurement data. 

Using fictitious standardised units avoided several factors interfering with magnitude judgements: participants’ prior knowledge, explanation of pollution measurements, and difficulty comprehending scientific units. The use of single topic and the reduced ecological validity ultimately afforded greater experimental control.

This study explored interpretations of magnitude using rating scales, rather than measuring behaviour. However, participants were asked to rate the *urgency* with which plotted pollution levels should be addressed. This specific judgement assists in capturing impressions of overall magnitude, and avoids asking participants the abstract question of how ‘large’ values plotted are. Furthermore, assessing urgency requires consideration of the degree of action required for addressing pollution levels, engaging participants’ decision-making capacities.

## Summary of Findings

This work demonstrated that colour legends’ limits contribute to interpretations of absolute magnitude in choropleth maps. The corresponding location of plotted data points within the accompanying colour legend influenced magnitude judgements, despite consistency in the colours used to convey plotted values. Magnitude ratings were higher when data points were located closer to the upper limit of the colour legend. This suggests that the colour legend was used as a frame of reference when interpreting how high or low plotted values were. This investigation also revealed that magnitude judgements were not influenced by the numerical values of plotted data points. It is likely that the use of fictitious standardised units prevented participants from drawing on contextual knowledge when assessing magnitude. 

Choropleth maps are usually designed in order to display spatial variability in a dataset: relative magnitude. Indeed, prior work has explored in depth how designs may promote optimal discrimination between plotted values (Jenks and Caspall, 1971; Brychtova and Coltekin, 2015; Dent et al., 2009). However, this typical application does not require that choropleth maps are only used for that purpose. This study illustrates that choropleth maps can also be legitimately employed to convey absolute magnitude. Thus, alternative approaches to data visualisation design which break with convention can still be valid.

This study also accords with the observation that interpretations of values in choropleth maps can depend on inferences about the minimum and maximum values in a colour legend (Schloss et al., 2019). Schloss et al. (2019) found that a map’s background colour influenced judgements about whether plotted values were large or small (quantity), whereas this study found that legends’ limits influenced judgements about *how* large or small plotted values were (subjective magnitude).

## Relationship to the Study in Chapter 3

The first study in this thesis demonstrated that axis limits affect interpretation of magnitude in dot plots. This second study demonstrates that these findings generalise to a different type of data visualisation: choropleth maps. These results build upon the first study’s observations by demonstrating that the numerical context accompanying data points influences interpretations even when the physical characteristics of the plotted values do not change. This also accords with the first study’s finding that judgements were primarily informed by the relative numerical positions of plotted values, as opposed to their absolute physical positions. Other contributions include demonstrating that this bias occurs when manipulating only one axis limit and when using a horizontal (rather than vertical) colour legend.

## The Research Question for the Next Study

The empirical research conducted in this thesis thus far has demonstrated that interpretations of magnitude are influenced by the numerical context in which plotted values are presented. However, this thesis has not yet explored denominator values, which are another relevant aspect of context for magnitude judgements. Knowledge of a denominator is relevant to judging absolute frequencies. For example, when evaluating a business expense, awareness of the total available budget can provide perspective on the magnitude of the amount spent. Including denominator values in axes is another example of conveying relevant values that do not appear in plotted data. Therefore, the third and final investigation in this thesis explores how this type of contextual information informs interpretations of magnitude in bar charts.

This final study can also assist in understanding how the influence of visualisation design choices on a viewer’s interpretation is affected by their awareness of a dataset’s characteristics. The first study in this thesis observed a relatively small bias in the interpretation of probability values in familiar scenarios. The second study in this thesis observed a relatively large bias in the interpretation of ambiguous pollution measurements. The third and final study in this thesis contains a manipulation of participants’ knowledge about plotted datasets. This provides insight into how knowledge of the numerical context behind plotted data can affect magnitude judgements, in addition to graphical cues.
