# Preface to Chapter 5 {.unnumbered}

The overall objective of this thesis is to explore the role of axis limits in the cognitive processing of absolute magnitude in data visualisations. My aim is to address a general cognitive mechanism, therefore experiments should not be limited to one type of data or visualisation format. Rigorous evidence requires examination of different stimuli. Therefore, the second investigation in this thesis explores interpretations of magnitude in choropleth maps.

Choropleth maps are a type of data visualisation conveying numerical data associated with discrete geographical areas. For example, they may be used to display literacy rates or the prevalence of an infection in different regions. Values for each region are encoded using colour, often with darker colours symbolising higher values. This contrasts with other popular visualisation formats where numerical values are encoded through geometric attributes. For example, scatterplots, bar charts, and pie charts, which employ position, length, and angle, respectively. 

A colour legend often accompanies choropleth maps, displaying the mapping between colours and data points. This serves the same purpose as a typical numerical axis (e.g., in a bar chart), showing how visual features correspond to numerical values. Therefore, a colour legend’s limits are functionally equivalent to axis limits. However, one important difference between a colour legend and a typical axis makes the choropleth map a valuable instrument in this investigation into cognitive processing. Crucially, it is possible to manipulate a colour legend’s limits without changing the appearance of plotted values in the map or the correspondence between colours and numerical values. This contrasts with the manipulation of the axes of dot plots in the first set of experiments in this thesis, where manipulating axis limits necessarily altered the appearance of plotted values. Therefore, the second investigation explores whether interpretations of magnitude are informed by a colour legend’s limits alone, in the absence of any change to the appearance of plotted values.