# Postscript to Chapter 6 {.unnumbered}

## Overview

The final set of experiments in this thesis was designed to examine the role of *denominator information* in the interpretation of absolute magnitude in data visualisations. A data visualisation’s y-axis may be expanded to incorporate not just plausible values, but a denominator from the underlying dataset, subsequently reducing magnitude ratings. When this graphical cue is accompanied by a textual cue to denominator information, its influence on interpretations of magnitude is diminished, compared to when no textual cue is present. Thus, this set of experiments revealed that accompanying contextual information, in addition to visualisation design, informs subjective judgements of magnitude.

## Rationale for Experimental Design

This set of experiments aimed to explore how axes which incorporate denominator values affect magnitude judgements. Manipulating upper axis limits in bar charts necessarily alters the length of the bars. Therefore, the differences between conditions in this set of experiments are less subtle than in the first set of experiments in this thesis, which employed dot plots. However, changes in the length of bars themselves should not necessarily be considered a confound. It is impossible to avoid these changes, therefore the *overall* appearance of the visualisation should be considered part of the manipulation. A lack of precise experimental control over separate elements does not preclude valuable insight into the cognitive processing of magnitude in bar charts.

These experiments employed default axis limits from a popular visualisation tool in half of experimental trials. As default settings are frequently adopted by data visualisation designers, this reduces artificiality in stimuli, enhancing the experiment’s ecological validity. Studying default settings means the conclusions from this set of experiments are directly applicable to common visualisation designs, assisting the development of relevant considerations for designers.

## Summary of Findings

In the first experiment in this chapter, participants rated magnitudes as lower when axes terminated far above the plotted data, compared to just above the plotted data. The former condition provided a graphical cue to the relevant denominator value, whereas the latter condition, which used the default axis setting, did not. Additionally, when there was no graphical cue to the denominator, a proportion of extreme high magnitude ratings reflected substantial differences in the interpretation of charts in the two conditions. The second experiment in this chapter revealed that substantial differences in interpretation regularly occur when accompanying text omits denominator information, eliciting a greater bias than when denominator information is included. This interaction demonstrates that awareness of the numerical context of plotted values diminishes the influence of axis limits on interpretations of magnitude. Data visualisation literacy levels predicted some variability in the observed biases, but could not fully explain these effects.

Risk perception research on axes and denominators in bar charts has observed that including labels with numerical values decreased the impact of graphical depictions (Okan et al., 2018). The final set of experiments in this thesis corroborates this claim by manipulating numerical values in accompanying text. Prior research has measured risk *understanding* (Garcia-Retamero and Galesic, 2010) or has combined absolute magnitude ratings with other judgements to create a general risk perception measure (Okan et al., 2018). Therefore, the final set of experiments in this thesis expands upon this prior work by examining absolute magnitude judgements in isolation. This investigation also explores responses to a different topic, which does not concern risk.

## Relationship to the Findings in Chapter 4 and Chapter 5

This set of experiments concludes the empirical work in this thesis by revealing how axis limits and additional cues interact to influence magnitude judgements. These findings demonstrate that considering contextual information is important for understanding the effects of design choices on interpretations of magnitude. However, these experiments also provide insight into the differences in the two preceding investigations regarding the *extent* to which axis limits influence magnitude judgements. The first set of experiments in this thesis (Chapter 4) observed relatively small differences in participants’ ratings between conditions, whereas the second experiment in this thesis (Chapter 5) observed much larger differences. In light of the findings from the final set of experiments, it seems likely that differences in contextual information may have contributed to these contrasting results. In the second experiment in this thesis (Chapter 5), use of fictitious standardised units may have increased reliance on axis limits as a source of information when assessing magnitude. Consequently, this resulted in increased bias in judgements. 

This set of experiments used denominator values as upper axis limits. This contrasts with preceding experiments, where the type of data (e.g., relative frequencies, measurements) does not have corresponding denominators. Therefore, the final set of experiments extends the line of enquiry to examine a different approach to setting axis limits, based on the underlying dataset. By incorporating a denominator, an axis presents the entire range of *possible* values, rather than a range of *plausible* values. Denominators may increase awareness of whether plotted values are *numerically* high or low, whereas plausible values may increase awareness of whether plotted values are *comparatively* high or low, in the context of other relevant magnitudes. Future work examining whether viewers are sensitive to this difference would provide greater insight into the framing effects elicited by axis limits.

This set of experiments on bar charts, and the second experiment in this thesis on choropleth maps, explore approaches to designing data visualisations beyond typical defaults. They suggest that not all data visualisation designs are suitable for communicating all aspects of data. Therefore, considering alternatives to the default options may be useful when conveying absolute magnitude. Atypical approaches to data visualisation design may provide clarity for viewers.

## References

Garcia-Retamero R, Galesic M. 2010. Who profits from visual aids: Overcoming challenges in people’s understanding of risks. *Social Science & Medicine* **70**:1019–1025. doi:[10.1016/j.socscimed.2009.11.031](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2009.11.031)

Okan Y, Stone ER, Bruine De Bruin W. 2018. Designing Graphs that Promote Both Risk Understanding and Behavior Change *Risk Analysis* **38**:929–946. doi:[10.1111/risa.12895](https://doi.org/10.1111/risa.12895) 
